The journey of the Labyrinth Society (TLS) is very similar to that of a labyrinth walk. The “labyrinth landscape” has changed significantly since the Labyrinth Society’s inception in 1998. It is a U.S. nonprofit 501c3 organization. At that time when someone mentioned “labyrinth,” a blank stare or a quizzical expression usually followed.

Today, after all these years of TLS members among others sharing labyrinths with the world, labyrinths have become more mainstream, and there are people all over the world building labyrinths. Our Facebook group has over 9,000 members from all over the world, and there are posts in German, Dutch, Spanish, and other languages as well as English. Each of these people touches countless others. TLS has accomplished its goal of bringing labyrinths to the world. Now what?

The Labyrinth Society is evolving to meet the changing needs of the growing worldwide labyrinth community. Although the TLS mission, “to support all those who create, maintain and use labyrinths, and to serve the global community by providing education, networking and opportunities to experience transformation,” has not changed, the ways in which we address that mission are changing. The Board of Directors discusses our direction every five years as part of its ongoing strategic planning. Our current vision is that, by 2023, TLS will reflect the abundant diversity, inclusivity, and creativity of the worldwide labyrinth community through its membership, operating structure, and programs.

Won’t you be a part of that change? TLS is staffed primarily by volunteers who give many hours of service because of their love of labyrinths. In addition to the tangible benefits of the various categories of membership listed elsewhere on this website, by joining us you will receive the larger benefit of knowing that you are part of a diverse and growing community of individuals around the world who probably have only one thing in common: their love of labyrinths. Your membership supports many TLS initiatives, such as this website, the Worldwide Labyrinth Locator, the Labyrinth Market, various TLS resources and materials, and the annual Gathering.
